# This script is to bulid rust-verification-tool(klee only) image
Test passed on ubuntu18.04, docker19.03, 2020,10,9.
The final size of built images is about 12GB.
( First you should make sure your docker doesn't need `sudo` privilege. To determine that you could try execute `docker ps -a` without `sudo`)
### build rust_verification
`./build` will automatically build images.  
Detailly, `./build` will build three images successively, which are `rust_compiler_dev`, `rust_klee`, `rust_verification`. The last one is what we need.
### run rust_verification
`./run` will start the container(the container will be automatically removed when you exit from it. If you don't need this atomatic removal,  remove `--rm` flag in `rust_verification/run` script)  
To replay the result of `try-klee` in container, execute:  
+ `cd $HOME/rust-verification-tools/try_klee` (the crate and some pre-written scripts are placed here)
+ `./cargo_build` (build the crate)
+ `./run_klee` (symbolically execute the .bc file with klee)
+ `./klee_test` (analyse the klee result)  
+ `./replay_input_values` (replay the result using input values generated by klee. This script now will fail due to link error)
### build stevenjiang1110/ubuntu-expect manually
This step is not necessary if you follow the `build rust_verification` step above, as in the `build` script, one pre-built image will be pulled from docker hub.  
However, if you want to know how to build this image manually, you can follow the steps below.  
Some scripts are interactive，so we need a ubuntu image with expect.  
The image can be built as follows:
+ `docker pull ubuntu:18.04`
+ `docker exec -it ubuntu:18.04`
+ execute `apt update && apt upgrade && apt install expect -y` in this container
+ choose district and time zone according to your own situation.(This is why I prepare this image)
+ execute `exit` in container to exit
+ `docker ps -a` to see the CONTAINER_ID just modified
+ then use the CONTAINER_ID: `docker commit CONTAINER_ID stevenjiang1110/ubuntu-expect:latest`
